1. Physician work and textual analysis:
I aim to investigate how “modernity” could be regarded as “traumatic” in the sense that
it causes certain symptoms to persist in our culture and society. This claim is juxtaposed with the
claim that the traumatic afflictions of modernity show symptoms like those of Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder that are perpetuated in “postmodernity.”
What this Series is About:
This series surveys a wide variety of “symptoms” in literature, newspapers, and urban
landscapes that display a strong affinity to what clinical psychology may call “trauma.” Then, I
will compare my observation of these symptoms in perspective to two messy, debatable terms,
“modernity” and “postmodernity.”
First, by surveying the writings of Charles Baudelaire, Félix Fénéon, and magazine
articles documenting peculiar events and incidents taking place in New York at the end of the
19th and beginning of the 20th century, I aim to sketch a type of life that is coming to shape in
the fin-de-siècle Europe and America that finds its symptoms reflected in what we call
“traumatic” today: an event, or a series of events whose force exceeds one’s ability to make sense
of or emotionally process it, usually leading to symptoms of PTSD.
Then, focusing on Sigmund Freud and Cathy Caruth’s work, I mark two traumatic
symptoms: “impulse to repeat” and “suspension of reality,” where a patient suffering from PTSD
experiences repetition of the traumatic event in the form of flashbacks and nightmares, and that
the patient may suffer from dissociative episodes where reality appear “unreal.” Following this,
I analyze, with the help of Mark Fisher’s writings, the contemporary musical scene, movie
production, and architecture. Citing Fredric Jameson, I claim that both symptoms could be found
in the cultural production and urban landscape of “postmodernity.” However, it must be
emphasized that my mapping of traumatic symptoms onto the ambiguous and contested
concepts of “modernity” and “postmodernity” must be accompanied by my insistence on these
terms' lack of conceptual clarity. Rather, it is a strategic use of their rhetorical and historical
strength to explore a set of symptoms.
Justifications:
It may be suspected that I aim to produce a grotesque patchwork of literary analysis,
cultural studies, philosophy, and clinical psychology, or, more charitably put, interdisciplinary
work. Yet it must be noted that the starting point of this project is strictly philosophical,
especially when it is conceived as “a symptomatology, and a semeiology” (Deleuze, Nietzsche, 3).
What does this mean? It means that I aim to think through a set of cultural and societal
phenomena as symptoms “whose sense must be sought in the forces that produce them,” in the
image of a “philosopher-physician” (Deleuze, Nietzsche, 75). To do philosophy as a
symptomatology “is always a question of art” because, much like how Deleuze, analyzing Sadeand Masoch’s writings, claims that “the clinical specificities of sadism and masochism are not
separable from the literary values peculiar to Sade and Masoch,” whose experience, historical,
social, and cultural milieu all reflected in their writings as symptoms, I propose a similar kind of
analysis for writers like Baudelaire (Coldness and Cruelty 14). Even more boldly speaking, I
propose cityscapes, architectures also contain “senses and values” that are the primary subject
of philosophy as symptomatology, for their construction and formation also reflect a whole
complex relation of forces behind their coming-to-be.
Therefore, it seems imperative that I should provide both the clinical and philosophical
framework for the analysis, because “history of medicine” is regarded from two perspectives,
with the first being “the history of illnesses, which may disappear, become less frequent,
reappear or alter their form according to the state of the society and the development of
therapeutic methods” (Deleuze, Coldness, 15). For example, how we coin the terms of “railway
spine,” “shell-shock,” “PTSD,” and “Epigenetic Trauma.” However, these are terms or names for a
set of symptoms that are subject to change, revision, or even cancellation. This brings us to the
second perspective, i.e. “the history of symptomatology, which sometimes precedes and
sometimes follows changes in therapy or in the nature of diseases”–in short–“symptoms are
named, renamed and regrouped in various ways” (Deleuze, Coldness, 15). While finding the
clinical history of PTSD interesting, I am more interested in how these symptoms emerge, and
perhaps how are they grouped together, because when we take social and cultural symptoms as
subjects of examination, even the naming and grouping of these symptoms into a term or a
category can be a symptom in itself: why is it grouped this way? And to illustrate with a
question: What makes a Victorian doctor think that what we would today call PTSD is due to
pure physical shock to the spine?
Implications:
What this section may lead to is a general study of how philosophy as a symptomology
could be used to read not just text, but cultural production and architecture.
2. Modernity as Symptom 1: Literary Examination
[Examination of Literary Works Will be Inserted Here. One from Baudelaire’s Paris
Spleen, a general study of Félix Fénéon’s Novels in Three Lines, Newspaper excerpts from the turn
of the century NYC about various incidents.
All this literature captured a certain intensification of movement, almost violent. The
surplus being used as an investment for a new batch of productive capital, the growth of profit,
the rapidity of transportation, the growth of skyscrapers, the rising smoke of London smog of
the Victorian era, and the overwhelming amount of sensory input that exceeds one’s capacity to
process are all part of the modern scheme, the motifs that epitomize the modernity. It is this
same motion of accumulation that sets the definitive character of lyric poetry in WalterBenjamin, the shock that would be the central productive and creative force of poetry, and it
would “sterilize this incident for poetic experience” when “it were incorporated directly in the
registry of conscious memory.”1 In a sense, the shock experienced by lyric poets is to be the libido
of poetry creation only when it is not integrated into consciousness, only when it is represented
as mémoire involuntaire. The question, then, is what kind of literature is created through such a
process? What is the symptom of the literature we just surveyed?
The question is essentially a question of what shocked the poet and how the poet was
shocked. The action of parrying shocks assaulting one from all directions is not a privileged
activity reserved especially for lyric poets. It is characteristic of Benjamin’s observation, which is
that “[the] interpersonal relationships of people in big cities are characterized by a markedly
greater emphasis on the use of the eyes than on that of the ears.” 2 You don’t wish to be blind in a
city, for you will run into people all the time, or perhaps fall into a manhole due to the poor
urban planning. You do not listen attentively for the sound of the bus that has its wheels
rubbing on the ground from a far distance, you look out for the bus that is coming for you with
the impatient driver on his third shift. You will need good eyes to make up for the ears
obfuscated by the cars humming their engines around, by people talking, by music played in
stores, etc. [insert again Baudelaire’s writings on a poet’s observation of the crowd in general.]
Amongst the interwoven web of a massively complex transportation system filled with
numerous heads, one is subjected to a continuing flow of loss. To see a car pass by with flashing
speed, to see people getting on and off on a bus, to be with others in a hermetically sealed place
like a subway or train, only to bid them farewell the very next second, all contribute to a sense of
constant loss that is different from the traditional “travel from this village to the other on a slow
cart or carriage” experience. The coincidence with trauma here is one of constant bereavement,
where the visage, the locus of establishing an ethical and personal relation, is always in a state
of afterimage because there is no capturing one’s image unless you dedicate yourself to a career
of professional stalking. This bereavement is “a farewell forever which coincides in
[Baudelaire’s] poem with the moment of enchantment.”3 The “agitated veil” of the crowd
through which Baudelaire sees Paris is common to all city dwellers, which consists of imposed
activities like being pushed around, or spotting a visage in a surging tide of crowd, only to have
it lost and replaced by a new face new second. The experience in a modern city is therefore
traumatic in the sense that one experiences physical dizziness from transportation and
psychical dizziness, a recurring loss when being placed in a crowd that is constantly moving
without its own telos.
3. Modernity Diagnosis: Equalization, Homogenization, and Eternal Present
There is a central axiom that dominates modern cities: clock time.
1 Walter Benjamin, Illuminations (London: Cape, 1970), pp.162.
2 Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, 191.
3 ibid, 169.“He becomes an appendage of the machine.” 4 Is it a passage referring to Chaplin’s movie
Modern Times? Chronologically speaking, no. Formally speaking? Yes. The proletarian condition
described by Marx has become the collective experience of the modern era. Like works when the
industrial revolution first ignited its engine, the subjugation to a machine rhyme became more
and more prevalent. For young and old alike, “technology has subjected the human sensorium to
a complex kind of training.”5 The mortar shells and the motor engines are both the contraptions
of an industry that surrounded us and gave us a new sensation of time. A machine time.
Lyotard’s observation of technology is more than fitting: “[technologies] don’t respond to a
demand coming from human needs. On the contrary, human entities (individual or social) seem
always to be destabilized by the results of this development.” 6 The human subject, henceforth, is
rendered incapable of processing the stimuli, incapable of integrating the rapidly
revolutionizing experience and capital models, and a permanent sense of loss attributed to this
sense of unintergrability.
Repetition is a central pattern for both modernism and trauma. The assembly line
renders mass production possible through a series of adaptations to machine time, and
technologies like photography and film allowed the affordable replication of artworks that
were confined only to a specific group of people before. In short, what we witness in the process
of reproduction of the artwork, according to Benjamin, is the loss of the aura, immediacy and
authenticity of the artwork. Moreover, just as in the traumatic repetition, where “the repetition
of the traumatic experience in the flashback can itself be retraumatizing,” the reproductive order
of the artwork takes on the meaning on its own.7 “The work reproduced becomes the
reproduction of a work designed for reproducibility,” just as the repeated traumatic experience
becomes trauma in itself.8 The modern invention and reorganization of productive relations
provide repetition of traumatic experiences. Such is essentially the modern sensation
experienced by Baudelaire: “the disintegration of the aura in the experience of shock.” 9
Reproduction of films, one of the most prominent modern art forms, marks the height of such
transition from aura-infused art into the order of pure reproduction where the first paragraph of
Debord’s Society of Spectacle perfectly captures: “[everything] that was directly lived has moved
away into a representation.”10 The shattered graphics in Debord’s Mémoires can be read as a
shocked psyche traversing the highly modernized cities.
When space and time are compressed into clock time, the flow of time is suppressed. The
notion of a mathematical time prompts intersubstitutability, where “one subordinate clause
can be substituted for the other without harm to the truth” (Frege, Sense and Reference, 45). It
diminishes the importance of differences for industrial efficiency and temporal linearity, which
4 Karl Marx, The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert C. Tucker (New York, New York: Norton, 1978), pp.479.
5 Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, 175.
6 Jean-Francois Lyotard, “Defining the Postmodern”, 1387.
7 Cathy Caruth, Unclaimed Experience, 65.
8 Benjamin, Walter. “The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technological Reproducibility.” In The Norton Anthology of Theory and
Criticism, ed. Vincent B. Leitch (New York, New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2018) pp. 981.
9 Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, 194.
10 Guy Debord, The Society of Spectacle (Detroit, Michigan: Black & Red, 2018), pp.1.makes history a line of progression capable of being reversed and exposed under retrospection
by a perpetual present—We Moderns. Modernism expresses “a changed consciousness of time”
whose icon is “the vanguard and the avant-garde,” aesthetic conquistador “invading unknown
territory [and] conquering an as yet unoccupied future” (Habermas, Modernity - An Incomplete
Project, 100). Modernism, then, found itself manifesting itself through the logic of “an economy
of repression and melancholy” where “difference and difficulty must be incorporated for the
foundation to hold” (Scandura and Thurston, America and the Phantom Modern, 7). As a
homogeneous clock time requires the extinction of differences in duration–a city’s time, unified,
a factory’s time, standarized–modernism is the praxis of such elimination.
Therefore, modernism began its macabre project of integration at all fronts. In terms of
industrialization, assembly lines as the standard model of production were made possible by
“new conceptions of the body-as-machine … binding the corpus of the nation to the corporation
as the worker’s body built the machinery of capital” (Scandura and Thurston 9). The slow
accumulation and intensification where “money necessarily crystallizes out of the process of
exchange,” thereby creating a “universal equivalent” for measuring not only use-values but also
labor times by converting them according to exchange value (Marx, Capital Volume 1, 53). Here
mediator became the arbitrator, and necessity became absolute axiomatic. This axiomatic made
possible with capital “linking everyone into an identical system of market valuation and so
procuring the reproduction of social life through an objectively grounded system of social
bonding” (Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity, 102). Qualitative differences, which belong
inherently to the order of duration, were made impossible by the hegemony of quantitative
equivalence. The same process where heterogeneous time was made measurable through
homogeneous spatialization reveals itself in the economic realm of modernity.
On the artistic front, the novel art form of cinema was consummated in Hollywood with
its trademark technique of montage which transformed otherwise time-consuming story
development by compressing “different effects out of different times (old newspapers) and
spaces (the use of common objects)” for “a simultaneous effect” that is antithetical to durational
unfold of the flow: it is “spatialization of time” (Harvey 21). Moreover, the crystallization of
duration in space is most visible in the “modernist phase” of architecture. Whether it is brutalist
structures, skyscrapers, or the monumentality of buildings like the Empire State Building and
the Eiffel Tower, modernism aspires to communion with the eternal “by freezing time and all its
fleeting qualities” (Harvey 21). Such eternity is but an illusion because it is a stillness that
betrays the true everlastingness that is only to be found in perpetual motion. Envisioning itself
to be a vanguard that conjoins “the ephemeral and the fleeting with the eternal and the
immutable” like photography, modernist architecture is in truth “a ruthless break with any or
all preceding historical conditions” (Harvey 10, 12).And of both artistic, architectural, and industrial fronts, America is the paragon of
modernism. The Hollywood, New York City, and Ford T-models, all “[duck] the question of
origins” because they have “no primitive accumulation of time” and live “in a perpetual present”
thanks to their historical and geographical isolation from the rest of the world up to 18th and
19th century, where modernism climbed towards its peak (Baudrillard 76). The final assault of
modernism is expressed in Americanization as the great transnational-cultural-historical force
of homogenization, where “what was distinctively American had to be celebrated as the essence
of Western culture” (Harvey 37).
4. “Postmodernism” as Symptom: [possibly adding more examples and analysis from Harvey
and Jameson]
[example of Vaporwave and Arctic Monkeys]
Consider the incongruity conjured by the following image: a Greek bust, gazing skyward,
is poised on the checkered floor of pink and black; a picture of a 1980s cityscape at dusk further
back constitutes the mise en scène of the mysterious expression. This is the art cover of internet
artist Macintosh Plus’ most recognized album, Floral Shoppe, which contains the song “Lisa Frank
420/Modern Computing.” Deemed as a foundational piece in the establishment of the genre of
vaporwave, the song is basically a remix of Diana Ross’ 1984 release “It’s Your Move.” Two major
changes can be found in the remix: (1) there is a substantially slowed-down tempo, and (2) a
truncation of the original lyrics. Contrasting with the intensely paced rhythm of the original,
each note in the remix carries with it a prolonged past. The preceding notes seem to have
forgotten their evanescence and dither around the equivocally proceeding present. Additionally,
the coherent narrative of questioning the ambiguous affection of the singer’s lover in the
original metamorphoses into semantic illegibility as the remix initiates its lyrical part by the
refrain, a triple “I don’t...” that immediately vanishes and is replaced by the tune lurking in the
background of their utterances--language dissolves in duration, differing from the prominence
of the lyrics in the original. Inaugurated by Floral Shoppe, the vaporwave aesthetic started to
gain an increasing presence online, and over time, it has developed into a pastiche of 1980s
media (music and advertisement), Greek sculptures, and popular consumer icons. Blurring the
boundaries between motley signs, vaporwave commences a journey into the depths of
hauntological asynchronization, with memories intermingled, trespassing durational bounds
[use the song Ghosts by the band Japan as the transition point]: Observations of
contemporary music culture led Fisher to exclaim that the ability of art creation to “articulate
the present” is lost because “there is no present to grasp and articulate any more.” 11 What does he
mean by this? It is an extension of Fredric Jameson’s notion of “nostalgia mode,” as represented
in cultural pastiche. Unlike parody, which retains sympathy for the original, pastiche is a
“neutral practice of such mimicry… without the satirical impulse,” which is particular for
11 Fisher, “Ghost of My Life”, 19.postmodern culture.12 For example, The Big Lebowski, as a parody of noir films, puts the hippie-like
persona of “the dude” in contrast with the traditional masculine images carried to excess in
detective films, which can be read as a social commentary in response to the Gulf War. 13 On the
other hand, Star Wars can be treated as a pastiche because it refurbishes the old cultural
narrative of the cowboy (as Han Solo) or sci-fi doomsday box (the Death Star) without any
ulterior motives for social critique.14 Pastiche art does not “reinvent a picture of the past in its
lived totality” but reuses the artifacts of culture production to produce objects of consumption,
whose success relies on audiences experiencing a feeling of nostalgia. 15 Similarly, music groups
like Joy Division and Arctic Monkeys are nestled in an overwhelming sense of nostalgia that is
symptomatic of a stagnant culture.
Differing from what Fisher terms “psychological nostalgia,” which relies on a coherent historical
sense and is inherently modernist.16 Even though the narrative order is shuffled in modernist
writers like Proust, Joyce, and Faulkner, their reminiscences are still retrospectively established
as the past proper. The mémoire involontaire illuminates itself by appearing in the present, but
it does not formally haunt the narrative. Formal nostalgia, on the other hand, relies on
technology to refurbish the past; history haunts it by masking itself as the present. For example,
The Weeknd's “Blinding Light” offers an astounding sample of nostalgia for the 80s with its use
of a synthesizer, evoking a haunting presence of the past in the present through technological
necromancy. Such regurgitation of cultural templates is essentially postmodern to Fisher
because music genres like vaporwave showcase “a consequence of a retreat from the modernist
challenge of innovating cultural forms adequate to contemporary experience.” 17
For formal nostalgia, the impossibility to conceive cultural novelty leads to a generation
“whose every move was anticipated, tracked, bought and sold before it had even happened.” 18
Even the need for protest and hope for revolutionary change cannot escape “the pre-emptive
formatting and shaping of desires, aspirations, and hopes by capitalist culture.” 19 No rebellious
spirit can escape the container of postmodern formal nostalgia, because to rebel requires
critiquing or overthrowing the entrenched notions or system, which is an evolutionary process
of creation, either in the form of transformation or negation. “Nostalgia mode” liquidates such
possibility by mediating and resolving the anticipated urge for revolt in capitalism through
12 Fredric Jameson, “Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.” in Literary Theory: an Anthology, ed. Julie
Rivkin and Michael Rya (Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley Blackwell, 2017), 1761.
13 J.M. Tyree and Ben Walters, “The Big Lebowski”(London: Bloomsbury, 2020), 43.
14 Jameson, “Postmodernism”, 1763.
15 ibid.
16 Fisher, “Ghost of My Life”, 11.
17 ibid, 11-12.
18 Mark Fisher, “Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?” (Winchester: Zero Books, 2009), 9.
19 ibid.participation in spectacles of resistance: [It] performs our anti-capitalism for us, allowing us to
continue to consume with impunity.”20 The formal repetition of the artistic genre not only
infinitely conjures successful cultural templates from the past and refurbishes it with
technology into marketable form, but it also opens onto the anticipated emergence and
imaginary resolution of resistance. Henceforth, Fisher’s read of hauntology shows itself to be a
theoretical symptomization of an unattainable future whose derivative malady is cultural
ossification – what Fisher terms as “the slow cancellation of the future.”
5. “Postmodernism” Diagnosis:
Postmodernism, a term that gained traction in the later half of the 20th century and
reached its peak in the 1980s, is discontent with modernism’s projects. However, the term
“postmodern” is controversial due to its lack of a clear definition even among theorists who label
themselves “postmodernists.” While some theorists argued that it is therefore a dialectical
reaction to modernism, Jean-François Lyotard argued otherwise. For him, postmodernism
should not be interpreted as a separate intellectual and aesthetic movement distinct from
modernism, which would fall back on the modernist logic of separation and distinction.
Postmodernism is not interested in distinguishing itself from modernism as a theoretical
breakthrough, not “modernism at its end but in the nascent state, and this state is constant”
(Lyotard, What, 44). Postmodernism understands modernism’s arbitrariness in creating a
principle of equivalent exchange, but instead of endorsing such axiomatic, it tries to expose the
unrepresentable, the qualitative duration that is omitted by necessity. Therefore, while
modernism “allows the unpresentable to be put forward only as the missing contents,”
postmodernism “puts forward the unpresentable in the presentation itself” and “searches for
new presentations, not to enjoy them but to impart a stronger sense of the unpresentable”
(Lyotard, What 46). The rebellion of post-structuralism against structuralism, the deconstruction
of stable forms and metanarratives, and post-colonial study, these disciplines and schools
prospered under the banner of postmodernism, and what is recognizable in all of them is a desire
to point out the excessive, rupture in a coherent narrative, and, in essence, the heterogeneous
quality masked by homogeneous quantity.
Postmodernism thus is an “opening up” of “a vast landscape,” a broadening of the
horizon to the point of its disappearance, where “there is no longer any horizon of universality,
universalization, or general emancipation” (Lyotard, Meaning 47). It does not resemble what
modernism and its aesthetic traditions have done, which is a self-elevation on a linear
temporality as the “progressive” or “emancipated.” The postmodern mode of engaging critique is
an immanent one: it “evokes what it wishes to surpass or suppress” by techniques like pastiche
and parody (Hassan 149). It takes modernist avant-garde to the extreme by fully embracing
what modernity tried to harness—“the ephemerality, fragmentation, discontinuity” thus
achieving a sort of reductio ad absurdum (Harvey 44). This is because, by exposing the leaky
nature of the great modernism’s theoretical edifice, postmodernism points out the impossibility
20 Fisher, “Capitalist Realism”, 12.of structures to completely harness the content subsumed under them. If modernism, with its
adoption of homogeneous time as the mechanism to “suppress any notion of ‘difference’ which
might challenge the dominant model of subjectivity,” postmodernism unearths “the
heterogeneous and intermittent” of unanalyzable time to disrupt modernity’s discourse
“founded on an idea of time which follows a sequence and rhythm” (Richard 464).
The main criticism of postmodernism usually gathers around the lack of definition and
clear contour that such a cluster of loose theoretical speculation has. However, if the task of
postmodernism is to point out the existence of an unrepresentable in a system dominated by
representation, it is unfair to fault it for not giving a representation of the unrepresentable.
Instead of wishing postmodern theory to aspire to the same distinctness and clarity as
modernism, it would be more compelling to “accept the fragmentation, the pluralism, and the
authenticity of other voices and other worlds” while acknowledging this movement toward
quality, by necessity, requires a lessening of the quantitative actuality, which indeed “poses the
acute problem of communication and the means of exercising power through command thereof”
(Harvey 49). Modernism and postmodernism are therefore in a perpetual tension due to their
emphasis on two different understandings of time, but by this tension, they are incapable of
total separation: modernism is the necessity to represent the unrepresentable, while
postmodernism is the haunting awareness of the leaky nature of such representation.
[need to elaborate on the symptomatic parts, especially in regard to cultural production]
6. The Works of Gilles Deleuze:
[not sure if i should add this part yet, because this is just my proposal, but in short it is a
proposal that there is a metaphysical solution to the problem of traumatic modernity and
perpetuation of trauma in postmodernity in Deleuze’s work. I think it is better if I do it as a
separate project.]
His reading of Freud’s Beyond the Pleasure Principle
How do we reconceive that repetition might be the problem
Projects and Future Directions:
